I am the bitter memory of a childhood monument.
I was created in 2014 to commemorate the millions
of victims of enforced starvation in Ukraine
between 1932 and 1933.
The Holodomor, also known as the Terror-Famine
or the Great Famine was a man-made famine
in Soviet Ukraine.
The Holodomor famine was part of the wider
Soviet famine of 1932–1933 which affected
the major grain-producing areas of the country.
While scholars universally agree that the
cause of the famine was man-made, whether
or not the Holodomor constitutes a genocide
remains in dispute.
Some historians conclude that the famine was
planned and exacerbated by Joseph Stalin to
eliminate a Ukrainian independence movement.
Others suggest that the famine arose because
of rapid Soviet industrialization and the
collectivization of agriculture.
Ukraine was one of the largest grain-producing
states in the USSR, and as a result, was hit
particularly hard by the famine.
Early estimates of the death toll by scholars
and government officials vary greatly.
A joint statement to the United Nations signed
by 25 countries in 2003 declared that 7 to
10 million died.
However, current scholarship estimates a range
significantly lower, with 3 to 5 million victims.
The famine's widespread impact on Ukraine
persists to this day.
Since 2006, the Holodomor has been recognized
by Ukraine alongside 15 other countries, as
a genocide against the Ukrainian people, carried
out by the Soviet regime.
There is no benefit in starving another fellow
human to death no matter what is the crime
they made.
Our crime was living on our land.
Children, women, elders, and exhausted men
paid the price.
We hope innocent souls are not paying the
price of humanity’s greed and selfishness
anymore.